This is an interview with Bob McPherson, who is the
director of planning for the state of Texas. The
interview was conducted by Kent McLemore on the
1st of May, 1984, in Mr. McPherson's office in
Austin.
My first question is, what do you feel the state's
role in planning is, both present and
historically? Okay, first of all, you understand
there's a statutory requirement that makes the
governor the chief planning officer of the state.
So in that specific statute, which we can dig out
the citation for, the responsibility is very
clearly there. There are a number of other pieces
of legislation where the governor's office is
assigned oversight or planning or some kind of
management responsibilities. So there is a
statutory base Beyond that, I guess in terms of a
personal, if that's what we want to deal with.
That's fine, yes. It seems to me that in terms of the
current structure of state government, the
governor's office is in a role of encouraging and
facilitating planning, whether you're talking
about long-range planning or operational
planning.
the governor's office as structured is probably
not going to support within the office a staff
which would be required to do long-range planning
or very much operational planning. Where we are
now, it seems to me that there's no question about
the need for some long-range planning and some
planning in policy areas that certainly reaches
or stretches beyond the existing state agency
boundaries, you need a planning capability above
those state agencies that's not currently
present. If you look over at the Legislative
Budget Board, you find an organization there,
which is in essence a creature of the legislature,
that has the responsibility for budgeting and
evaluation, but it does not have a planning
responsibility. You look over in the governor's
office, and you think of the governor's office as
the office of the chief executive and kind of the
management office of state government. And you
find the title here, or the responsibility here,
but you don't find the staff. So the function, the
planning function, is really not performed here,
or a planning function above the state agency's.
So you've got kind of a planning coordination
function inside the governor's office,
coordinating the planning efforts in the
independent agencies. My own perception,
personally, is that that's a missing element in
state government. Either there should be some
mechanism above the state agencies to do
long-range planning, whether that be a function
of the Legislative Budget Board, Would it be a
function assigned to the governor's office or to
some other entity? You should budget, and you
should evaluate, and you should manage
day-to-day programs within the context of a plan.
You ought to have a yardstick there that says by the
year 2000, by the year 2010, by 1990, this is where
Texas ought to be. Let's take a given policy area
like human resources or health. What you do is
you've got to recognize that in state government,
there are a number of agencies who have some part of
the responsibility for the day-to-day operation
or implementation of health programs. We need
something above those agencies that looks at
health policy and human services policy and sets a
long-range direction and say, in Texas, this is
where we want to be in terms of providing these
kinds of services to the population. then more or
less with that direction set, the legislature can
appropriate, the state agencies can administer
with a sense of direction that in this policy area,
this is what we're trying to accomplish. And the
idea is that you can begin to not be so concerned
about defining problems or proposing solutions
that are within the... the jurisdictions or the
turf, if you will, of a given state agency. Does
that make sense? Yes. Do you understand what I'm
saying? Yes. And that's a piece that's missing.
And this is a personal perspective rather than the
office of the governor speaking, and it has to be
couched in those terms. That's fine. That that is a
piece that we need desperately, that we do not
have, Currently, we're trying to accomplish that
by the creation. Either the governor through an
executive order or the legislature through
statute has created a number of interagency
councils or task forces. And these tend to be
entities that sit above the state agencies and
have some responsibilities. And I think there's a
potential there to do some long-range planning
with those groups. Hopefully that will be used by
the legislature in the appropriations process.
But that's more of a wish than a statement of a
reality. In absence of any other formal
mechanism, I don't know how you're going to do it,
unless the LBB would pick up the long-range
planning responsibility. And if the governor's
office doesn't assume it in-house, inside, then
we've got
It was enacted by Senate Bill 711, which has in its
charge some responsibility for long-range
planning. We've got, sometimes it's under
federal law, where the law requires, one most
recent one is under the Job Training Partnership
Act. The federal law mandates a state job training
coordinating council, and the requirements
there are to look between or among the various
state agencies providing job training for
unemployed, low-income folks. So there's at
least the nucleus of a group in the job training and
employment area. We've got another one over here
in the health and human services area, and I could
name some others. So we're beginning to get those
interagency mechanisms there to do that kind of
planning. Creation of your artistic, where does
the Texas 2000 program come in? Well, the Texas
2000 project was an initiative of the prior
administration. And that was an initiative which
was not finalized in the sense of I think the people
who were involved with 2000 envisioned several
steps that they were not able to complete because
of the changes in administration. But as an
approach to identifying what some of the major
issues were and to gathering and formatting
information on problems, I think it was a positive
first step. It did not get into long-range
planning specifically and certainly not into
implementation strategies. It's one thing to say
this is where we want to be by the year 2000. The
second part of that is to generate some options and
come up with what you'd call the optimum strategy
for getting us there. What are the five steps that
it takes to get us from 1980 to 2000, or from 1990 to
2010? And that was not there. I think the people who
were involved in that were intelligent enough to
know that those were pieces yet to be developed,
but it didn't get there. The products that I have
seen are those relating to position papers and the
data gathering, identifying some of the major
areas, such as water, what it was going to do about
water.
But beyond problem identification, some
measurement, that's about where 2000 got. I know
you've been in state government for quite some
time, or around state government for quite some
time. Historically, what has been the state's
role related to planning? From my research, I've
dug up that really prior to 1960, the state hadn't
taken an interest in comprehensive planning.
Well, I think most of the planning, really until
the late 60s, most of the planning that was done in
state government was done in the agencies. And I
don't think the governor's office played a major
role in that at all. the 1960s began to change
things because the Great Society programs of the
Lyndon Johnson era. Just the sheer increase, if
you look at any statistics on what was happening to
federal grants and aid, grants and aid to the
states in any number of policy areas, and you look
back of 1960 or even the mid-60s, not very much was
happening. in terms of volume, in terms of
dollars, as a percent of total dollars measured.
And then all of a sudden, in the mid-'60s, I guess
for a number of different reasons, grants and aid
jumped significantly in terms of federal grants
either directly to the states or to programs
within the state. In other words, in some cases,
these grants went around state government, went
directly into local governments. But the sheer
magnitude of the flow forced states to begin to
think about planning seriously.
State agencies prior to that time largely been
reactive to the direction given by the state
legislature. They then fell into a position of
relating to the legislature but also having
available to them, if they'd fill out a grant
application, a significant amount of federal
money. And then this began to complicate their
lives in many ways because the federal money
brought requirements with it. Much of that money
was targeted, and it almost demanded some
additional planning. This was linked to regional
councils, because they were being formed,
weren't they, about this time? Well, they were
formed in the late 60s, I think. 67? 66 was the first
one that I know of. Okay. The whole regionalism
thing, I think, came from a recognition that The
amount of money that was available, the kinds of
problems we were facing demanded something other
than a county by county or a city by city plan or
problem identification plan and solution or
strategy for how we're going to solve the problem.
I think we began to recognize that the problems
were pervasive and did not respect political
jurisdictions. The problem didn't stop at the
county line. I mean, an issue of water or an issue of
unemployment, for that matter. We sensed that a
lot of the better jobs tended to move out into the
non-urban areas or out of the edge of the cities,
and yet many of the unemployed people were in the
central city. if you crossed a county line, the job
may be over here, the training institution over
here. So the whole issue was brought to our
attention, I think, rather vividly that we had to
think about something broader than just a given
program area or a given political jurisdiction.
Now something happened in there. In the mid-60s, a
lot of that money came categorically. And then in
the late 60s and early 70s, we began to think about
all of the related programs that had been created
by the grants and aid program, and how that once
they got into the city of Dallas or the city of
Houston, that the left hand didn't know what the
right hand was doing. So there was a big move from
the late 60s and early 70s, particularly during
the Nixon administration, of modified block
grants and block grants, which meant the money
still came from the feds. But they knocked out some
of the categorical restrictions and began to give
you block grants. And there were even
encouragements in there to do things on a
multi-jurisdictional basis. Several pieces of
that legislation encouraged consortia
arrangements, cities and counties joining
together to do things. So I think a lot of that
regionalism, the support for it, came from the
fact that the federal funding flow changed from a
categorical perspective of the 60s to a block
grant perspective in the late 60s and early 70s.
And then... There was one other. In a state like
Texas, I think we began to recognize, in the same
sense that the feds said, everything's not alike
all over the country. In other words, we can't sit
in Washington and design specific programs for
Houston. In Austin, we became more and more aware
of the differences in Texas. We talked about them a
long time, about Texas could be easily divided
into five other states or more. Somewhere in the
late 60s and early 70s, I think we really decided to
make an investment in the fact that there are a lot
of differences. And we came up with the 24
sub-state planning regions and the idea of
councils of government as aggregations of local
elected officials to get together to propose
solutions to problems. Another part of this was a
recognition that the closer people are to the
problem, the more likely they are to come up with a
solution that can be implemented in that local
area. And I didn't say the best solution. I said a
solution that is more likely to be acceptable or to
be implemented in that local area. So I think for
all those reasons, you've got to move toward
reasonableness. And anything we do right now, we
try to give I'm strong believer that this isn't
well the fact is this is not Rhode Island if we were
in Rhode Island I wouldn't support regionalism
because I don't have that much divergence or
difference diversity might be a better word but
I've got Texas and I've got 24 Rhode Islands if you
will I've got I like the fact that we think
regionally in Texas I think it's ridiculous not to
well uh In fact, we've been discussing in our
classes about the diversity of Texas. It's very
much diversified. This is brought home to us in
some simple things, as Lubbock's freezing while
Brownsville's making such things. Well, based on
this diversity in the regional idea, what is
Governor White's attitude about all this? Where
does he plan to go with planning in Texas in such a
diversified state? Well, I think he'll see us
continue to support regionalism.
At the same time, I don't think that necessarily
means that councils of government will continue
to have the same functions in the same policy areas
they've always had before. I think we'll rely on
the state, federal, local construct and continue
to support that. What you'll see in the White
administration is, had we done the Texas 2000
study, we might have looked at some other issues
first. We might have looked at human resources
rather than natural resources. If you look at some
of the first work that was done by the 2000 group, I
think you'll see it concentrated in the natural
resources area. If I'd have had anything to do
about it, we'd have started with people problems
first. Not that the others aren't important. So I
think it's not that we will either
propose to do away with regionalism. I would not
advocate that in any way. What we expect the
regional councils to do and the kinds of areas that
we might emphasize would be different. would be
more on the human resources side. You've already
seen in the White administration a very strong
push in education, job training, economic
development. Now, we recognize that economic
development's got many facets to it, and that one
of our major problems in any kind of economic
development initiative all tie back to the
natural resources available and to the social
infrastructure. the airports, the highways, the
level of any number of ingredients that are
essential to quality of schools. It really can be,
in some ways, an infrastructure issue. Because a
private firm looking at Texas, one of the first
questions would be, does this area have an airport
that will take care of my jet? Second question will
relate to the quality of life. That'll get into
parks and schools and those kinds of issues. Then
the availability of land, the availability of a
skilled workforce. All those factors are
important. So it all ties together just in a little
different way and where you would start. Sarah,
planning having to take on a different form. We've
been a primarily agricultural state, primarily
rural. We're becoming more urban, suburban. more
manufacturing-oriented, does that affect our
planning? In my mind, it doesn't affect the
basic steps in the planning process. They're the
science. What it means is that the problems are
different. If you look out at needs of the
population, because the fact the population is
increasing rapidly, because the population mix,
which people overlook sometimes, is changing
significantly. I think we're going to identify
different kinds of problems to be addressed. But
I'm a strong believer in the way to address those
problems doesn't change that much.
The common sense of the planning process, whether
you're dealing with Standard Oil of Indiana and
their plans for the North Sea, or the state of Texas
and how it might go about an economic development
strategy for the lower Rio Grande, the approach to
planning is much the same, strategic planning
particularly. Same kind of steps. Same kind of
steps. I realize you have a meeting at 3.30. But
I've got another minute if you want to raise
another question.
I guess I just want to reiterate for the purpose of
the table for the book, in what direction do you
think state planning should go from this point in
Kansas summation? Where should we go as a state
based on what we've done in the past? Well, let me
put it in a little bit even broader context. I think
there's a very strong management responsibility
in terms of the number of public dollars that we are
responsible for the effective and efficient
implementation of. There's a planning role here
that is yet to evolve. And I'm hopeful that we will
continue to give attention to it. And the piece
that I think is missing, which I think is
repetitive in what I've said earlier, is a
strategic planning piece. I think operational
planning is done within the agencies. I think
agencies are willing to carry out public policy
directives coming from the legislature. I don't
think there is a framework at this point within
which the legislature makes its incremental
program and budget decisions. And I think that's a
piece that's missing. Now, as long as I have
anything to do with it, I will push toward that
broader, where do we want to be at some point in the
future? And what kind of steps do we take now to get
there? So one of the keys is intergovernmental
cooperation among the state agencies, State
Highway Department, Texas Water Resources
Board, and so forth and so on. In my mind, each of
them has a lot of resources. And within their own
agencies, I think they efficiently as possible
manage those resources. I think they are denied
the bigger picture. I think each of them has a
perception of where we ought to go. I would propose
to get them together and let's together agree on
where the state ought to be out here, what the
capacity ought to be, what the capability ought to
be, what the systems ought to be, almost any aspect
you can think of. I would take them through a
process in which each of us involved in this thing
makes our values and our philosophies explicit
and says out of that, where is it that we want to be? I
think it's a hell of a team building exercise in the
first place. I think it does a lot to bring agencies
together toward a common objective. But I think as
long as we define those objectives, those goals,
independent of each other, we lose something. I
think there are definitely economies here for us
to sit down together and say, this is where we want
to be. Now, what part can my agency contribute to
the implementation of that plan? not how do I fight
to make sure my agency gets more money in the next
session. So then it should be a function of the
governor's office as? Governor's office can
facilitate that and should be leading it. Should
act as manager, as leader. Yes. The leadership,
the focus for that kind of activity probably,
that's a legitimate role for the governor. To do
the plan in the governor's office is not. I see. But
to coordinate would be? Yes. No question. Good.
That about takes care of my questions because I had
planned it for about 30 minutes. All right, all
right. Sorry, I was a little...